improve junit vintage docs about parallel execution (#4336)
junit-team/junit5: documentation/src/docs/asciidoc/user-guide/migration-from-junit4.adoc

<<running-tests-config-params, configuration parameters>>:

`junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true|false`::
  Enable/disable parallel execution (defaults to `false`).

> Requires opt-in for `classes` or `methods` to be executed in parallel using the configuration parameters below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Requires opt-in for `classes` or `methods` to be executed in parallel using the configuration parameters below.
```

>  Requires opt-in for `classes` or `methods` to be executed in parallel using the configuration parameters below.

Reviewer: There should definitely be two spaces at the start :)

> I’ve also had more feedback on documentation than on code when contributing. 😂

Author: oh 😅 fixed now. I wonder if spotless can be configured to catch this

Reviewer: I’m not very familiar with `Spotless`, so I’m not sure if it provides that feature.
If it does, it might be a good idea to discuss it with Marc and consider contributing.
It looks like the file below is used for `Spotless configuration`.

- https://github.com/junit-team/junit5/blob/main/gradle/plugins/common/src/main/kotlin/junitbuild.spotless-conventions.gradle.kts

Reviewer 2: As a former contributor to Spotless, there's nothing technical stopping us from adopting such a check. It would "just" require implementing a regex (which the Gradle plugin has native support for) or finding a JVM library or CLI tool that does the job.

However, as English uses full stops for ends of sentences, word shortenings (for example, "regarding" to "re.") and inside other words sometimes (for example, "01.01.2025"), this may be tricky to do without heuristics unless we're happy to catch all full stops followed one space or 3+ spaces.

>   Requires opt-in for `classes` or `methods` to be executed in parallel using the configuration parameters below.

Reviewer 3: We currently use a different convention, namely hard-wrapping at 90 characters. Please revert this change and reformat your additions accordingly.

Author: fixed now

one for each test class:

[source,plaintext]
----
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test3
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test3
----

[[migrating-from-junit4-parallel-execution-method-level]]
==== Parallelization at Method Level

Alternatively, we can enable the parallel test execution at a `method` level,
rather than the `class` level:

[source,properties]
----
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.methods=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.pool-size=4
----

Therefore, the test methods from within a class will be executed in parallel,
while different test classes will be executed sequentially:

[source,plaintext]
----
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - BarTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-3 - BarTest::test3

ForkJoinPool-1-worker-3 - FooTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - FooTest::test3
----

[[migrating-from-junit4-parallel-execution-class-and-method-level]]
==== Full Parallelization

> Finally, we can also enable the parallelization at both `class` and `method` level:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, we can also enable the parallelization at both class and method level:
```

Author: fixed

[source,properties]
----
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.classes=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.methods=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.pool-size=8
----

With these properties set, the `VintageTestEngine` will execute all the tests classes
and methods in parallel, potentially significantly reducing the overall test suite execution time:

[source,plaintext]
----
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-6 - FooTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-7 - BarTest::test3
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-3 - FooTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-8 - FooTest::test3
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-5 - BarTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-4 - BarTest::test1
----

[[migrating-from-junit4-parallel-execution-disabled]]
==== Sequential Execution

On the other hand, if we disable the parallel execution, the `VintageTestEngine`
will execute the tests sequentially, regardless of the other properties:

[source,properties]
----
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=false
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.classes=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.methods=true
----

> Similarly, the parallelization won't work if we only enable the parallel execution,
> but we don't specifically enable a parallel execution level:
> 
> [source,properties]
> ----
> junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
> junit.vintage.execution.parallel.classes=false
> junit.vintage.execution.parallel.methods=false
> ----
> 
> In such cases, all the tests will be executed sequentially:
> [source,plaintext]
> ----
> main - BarTest::test1
> main - BarTest::test2
> main - BarTest::test3
> 
> main - FooTest::test1
> main - FooTest::test2
> main - FooTest::test3
> ----

Reviewer 3: This is actually be considered a configuration error and produces a warning. Therefore, we should point that out and omit the example below.

```suggestion
Similarly, tests will be executed sequentially if you enable parallel execution in general
but enable neither class-level nor method-level parallelization.
```

Author: removed

  Enable/disable parallel execution of test methods (defaults to `false`).

`junit.vintage.execution.parallel.pool-size=<number>`::
  Specifies the size of the thread pool to be used for parallel execution.

> By default, the  number of available processors is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  By default, the  number of available processors is used.
```

Author: I added the spaces, as suggested - but do we need them? 

I have added the brake lines to comply with this [sembr](https://sembr.org/) convention, but I won't have an effect on the way the text is displayed. That's why I haven't added any space at the start of the row.

Reviewer: I hope this is helpful to you.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/be13858f-2ebf-40e9-bf25-593ec12333fd)

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8fdc7ba5-7850-4f8d-a0ab-9eec56717d05)

- https://github.com/junit-team/junit5/pull/4242#discussion_r1948051443

Let's assume we have two test classes `FooTest` and `BarTest` with each class containing three unit tests.
Now, let's enable the parallel execution of test classes:

[source,properties]
----

> junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
> junit.vintage.execution.parallel.classes=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.classes=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.pool-size=2
```

Author: I left this property out to allow the reader to focus on the ones that directly impact the example. 

For the given example with 2 test classes and parallelization enabled per class, we'll always use 2 threads - even if the thread pool size is larger, correct?

Reviewer: > For the given example with 2 test classes and parallelization enabled per class, we'll always use 2 threads - even if the thread pool size is larger, correct?

That’s correct.

While you could explain it by saying that running FooTest and BarTest uses two threads, I believe it is more appropriate to relate it to the size of the thread pool rather than directly linking the number of tests to the number of threads. For example, when running `three tests` in parallel with a thread pool size of `two`, only `two threads` will be used, regardless of the number of tests.

What do you think? @marcphilipp

Reviewer 3: I think explaining one concept at a time (`classes`, `methods`, both, pool size, and then sequential execution) would be easier to follow. Therefore, I'd omit it here and introduce a new "Configuring the Pool Size" subsection before the "Sequential Execution" one.

----
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.classes=true
----

With this setup, the `VintageTestEngine` will use two different threads,
one for each test class:

[source,plaintext]
----
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test3
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test3
----

On the other hand, we can enable the parallel test execution at a `method` level,
rather than the `class` level:

[source,properties]
----
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.methods=true

> junit.vintage.execution.parallel.pool-size=4

Reviewer: Why did you remove this?

[source,plaintext]
----
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - BarTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-3 - BarTest::test3

ForkJoinPool-1-worker-3 - FooTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - FooTest::test3
----

Finally, we can also enable the parallelization at both `class` and `method` level:

[source,properties]
----
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.classes=true

> junit.vintage.execution.parallel.methods=true

Reviewer: The default number of threads is `Runtime.getRuntime().availableProcessors()` unless specified otherwise.
So, it would be a good idea to include a configuration setting to define the number of threads.

- https://github.com/junit-team/junit5/blob/main/junit-vintage-engine/src/main/java/org/junit/vintage/engine/execution/VintageExecutor.java#L48

  Specifies the size of the thread pool to be used for parallel execution. By default, the
  number of available processors is used.

[[migrating-from-junit4-parallel-execution-class-level]]
==== Parallelization at Class Level

Let's assume we have two test classes `FooTest` and `BarTest` with each class containing

> three unit tests. Now, let's enable the parallel execution of test classes:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
three unit tests. Now, let's enable parallel execution of test classes:
```

Author: fixed now

[source,properties]
----
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.classes=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.pool-size=2
----

With this setup, the `VintageTestEngine` will use two different threads,
one for each test class:

[source,plaintext]
----
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test3
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test3
----

[[migrating-from-junit4-parallel-execution-method-level]]
==== Parallelization at Method Level

> Alternatively, we can enable the parallel test execution at a `method` level,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, we can enable parallel test execution at a `method` level,
```

rather than the `class` level:

[source,properties]
----
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.methods=true

> junit.vintage.execution.parallel.pool-size=4

Reviewer 3: As per my suggestion above.

```suggestion
```

Author: fixed

----

> Therefore, the test methods from within a class will be executed in parallel, while

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Therefore, the test methods within each class will be executed in parallel, while
```

different test classes will be executed sequentially:

[source,plaintext]
----
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - BarTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-3 - BarTest::test3

ForkJoinPool-1-worker-3 - FooTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - FooTest::test3
----

[[migrating-from-junit4-parallel-execution-class-and-method-level]]
==== Full Parallelization

> Finally, we can also enable the parallelization at both class and method level:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, we can also enable parallelization at both class and method level:
```

[source,properties]
----
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.classes=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.methods=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.pool-size=8
----

> With these properties set, the `VintageTestEngine` will execute all the tests classes and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With these properties set, the `VintageTestEngine` will execute all tests classes and
```

methods in parallel, potentially significantly reducing the overall test suite execution time:

[source,plaintext]
----
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-6 - FooTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-7 - BarTest::test3
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-3 - FooTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-8 - FooTest::test3
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-5 - BarTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-4 - BarTest::test1
----

[[migrating-from-junit4-parallel-execution-disabled]]
==== Sequential Execution

> On the other hand, if we disable the parallel execution, the `VintageTestEngine`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the other hand, if we disable parallel execution, the `VintageTestEngine`
```

> will execute the tests sequentially, regardless of the other properties:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
will execute all tests sequentially, regardless of the other properties:
```

  Specifies the size of the thread pool to be used for parallel execution. By default, the
  number of available processors is used.

[[migrating-from-junit4-parallel-execution-class-level]]
==== Parallelization at Class Level

Let's assume we have two test classes `FooTest` and `BarTest` with each class containing
three unit tests. Now, let's enable parallel execution of test classes:

[source,properties]
----
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.enabled=true
junit.vintage.execution.parallel.classes=true
----

With this setup, the `VintageTestEngine` will use two different threads,
one for each test class:

[source,plaintext]
----
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test1
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test2
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-1 - BarTest::test3
ForkJoinPool-1-worker-2 - FooTest::test3
----

[[migrating-from-junit4-parallel-execution-method-level]]
==== Parallelization at Method Level

> Alternatively, we can enable parallel test execution at a `method` level,
> rather than the `class` level:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, we can enable parallel test execution at a method level,
rather than the class level:
```
